We've talked a lot about how relational
databases work by breaking large data sets
up into smaller tables of
data with unified themes.
We generally try to organize our themes so
that we replicate individual data
entries as rarely as possible.
Of course,
this strategy only works if we can put
the tables back together when we need to.
We achieve this using a class
of SQL commands called joins.
Joins have a bad reputation
among new SQL users, but
in my experiences joins
are only hard to understand if
you don't have a firm grasp of how
relational databases are set up.
Since you mastered the material
in week one of this course,
you do have a firm grasp of how
relational databases are set up.
So you will master joins very quickly.
By the end of this video,
you'll understand how joins work and
why there are different kinds of them.
To understand what joins are,
let's consider the problem
they are meant to solve.
Recalling the tables we made for
our Egger's roast coffee database.
Let's focus on just two of those tables,
the orders table and
the distribution center table,
and let's zoom in a little bit.
You can see that in order for us to learn
any information about the distribution
center of the items in the orders table,
you have to link each row of the orders
table data to the appropriate row of
the distribution center table data by
matching up the distribution location ID.
So far, we have talked about linking
tables as a general concept for
organizing databases, but
now we have to think about the details of
how the database can
actually make that look.
Take a second to think about at least
one strategy a database could use to
link these two tables together.
One of the first strategies that might
come to mind is that the database could go
through the distribution center ID column
of the order's table row by row and ask,
which distribution center ID is this?
It's dl1?
Okay, in that case,
it matches up with all the data in
the dl1 row of the distribution center.
You could implement this strategy in
Excel with a VLOOKUP function, and
it would work very well if your
data set wasn't too large.
But what if you had to copy
the VLOOKUP function to 100 million
rows spread across multiple
spreadsheets in Excel?
Even if you're an Excel expert,
it would take a bit of time to even paste
the VLOOKUP formulas into
all the appropriate cells,
although a computer is much quicker than
a human at these types of operations.
A similar concept still holds for
a database.
Operations that make
databases look information up
are always relatively slow compared to
other types of mathematical operations.
And the more times a database has to look
up that information or the wider the pool
of information it has to search,
the slower the database query will be.
So the row by row strategy
is going to be inefficient.
Is there another strategy we could use?
For those of you who've done
a lot of analysis using MATLAB or
R software you might be thinking isn't
there someway we could do this using
a matrix algebra if we treat
each table as a matrix?
Well I sympathize with that statement, but
I'm not sure what the strategy would be,
given that in most cases the tables you
will be combining will not be
of the same length or width.
Here's where set theory
comes to the rescue.
The theoretical way set theory combines
two sets is by multiplying them,
resulting in what is called
the Cartesian product, or cross product.
In the case of sets, multiplication
doesn't mean multiplying numerical values.
The Cartesian product is a set that
contains all the possible pairs of items
in two tables.
If this was our orders table, or set,
and this was our distribution table, or
set, this would be the Cartesian
product of the two sets.
You can see that the Cartesian product
gives every possible combination
of the rows.
The way databases combine tables is by
first filtering the columns you are using
to link tables together by the criteria
you specify in your query,
then it makes the Cartesian
products of these filtered columns.
And finally, it appends any additional
columns that you asked for in your query.
So the way you can join tables in your
queries to get data you want is to specify
I only want the Cartesian product
of rows that have the same IDs and
a unique ID column.
You need to know about cartesian
products because sometimes you get
unexpected outputs when you join
tables that have duplicate rows or
columns that have many
to many relationships.
These outputs will only make sense if
you remember the fundamental notion
that Cartesian products underline joins.
We're going to work our way up to
understanding those types of situations.
But let's start by thinking about joins
in the perfect idyllic situation when you
have no duplicate rows, and
each row in one table is only
connected to one row on another table.
Imagine that you have the following two
tables that are linked by department ID.
There are at least four different
ways you can combine these tables.
The first would be if you wanted to
find out all the employees who work in
a current department.
In this case, you want a list of
all the employee rows which have
matching department IDs
in the department table.
This type of join, where a row is only
included if its value is contained in both
unique columns of a table
is called an inner join.
The result of an inner join of these
two tables will look like this.
Since there is no department ID of 4 or
5 in the department table, and
no department ID of 3 in the employee
table, the name Jessica, the name Daisy,
and the department of furniture
will be left out of the result.
Also notice that the employee Brian and
the department Cosmetics were dropped from
the results because NULL values can
never be used to link rows in a join.
Null values are not linked
up to other linked values.
They're simply excluded.
What if you wanted a list of all the
employees and their departments regardless
of whether the employee's department
was in the current department table?
In this case, you could use an outer join.
When you write an outer join,
the order you enter the tables
into your query matters.
The name of the join defines which table
will have all of it's values included.
Let's assume we will enter
the employee table first and
the apartment table second in our query.
In this case, the result of the LEFT outer
join of these two tables would result in
all of the values of
the table on the left,
in the Employees table being included.
Values in the table on the right
would only be included if they have
a value in their linking column that
matches up with the linking column in
the table on the left.
Here's what a result of a left join
on our tables would look like.
You see here that all of our employees
are included in the output, but
the only departments that are included
are those that have a matching
value in the Department ID column.
Notice that wherever there was a row
in the employee table that didn't have
a matching department ID in the Department
table, the department is listed as NULL.
The road that had a null value in the
employees table is included in the output
table this time because there is no
criterion that it had to much up with
a value in another column.
You could also retrieve a list of
all the current departments and
their employees, regardless of whether
any employees in the employee table
were pointed to a department
in the department table.
If we once again include the employee
table first and the department table
second in our query, we could acquire
this list using a right outer join.
In right joins, all the results of
the table on the right are included.
Values of the table on the left
are included only if they have a value in
their linking column that matches up with
the linking column in table on the right.
So the results would look like this.
This time, all of the department
rows are included in the output.
However, the furniture row has
a null value in the employee table,
because there is no department ID 3
listed anywhere in the department ID
column of the employees table.
The row of data in the department
table had a null value and
department ID is included in the output.
On the other hand, the rows of data
from the employee table that do not have
department IDs that appear in
the department table are excluded.
At this point you might be thinking,
wait, couldn't I get the same result
if I ran the join we just
described using a left join but
reversed the order of the tables
I enter into the query?
The answer is yes, yes you could.
Left and
right outer joins are fairly redundant.
They just give you flexibility
in how you write your query.
A left outer join with the tables written
in this order gives you the same result
as a right outer join with
the tables written in this order.
There is one more type of
join we haven't talked about.
Full outer joins.
Full outer joins would give you all the
employees and departments list in one or
the other table,
regardless of whether they match
up with values in the other table.
You might use this if you simply wanted
to extract all of the data that meet
a certain criterion, so
that you can examine every single
piece of raw data in your analysis.
The result of a full outer join between
our two tables would look like this.
You can see all rows are included, and
whenever there was a row that didn't have
a matching value in the department
ID column, no values are entered.
One important thing to know is that not
all database management systems support
full outer joins.
MySQL in particular does not support
full joins while Teradata does.
The fact that not all database management
systems support full outer joins gives you
a sense of how rarely they are used.
So those are the basic
concepts behind joins.
They are summarized in this diagram
that you might want to keep for
future reference.
Not too bad so far, right, I agree.
That said, so far we have only looked at
the results of joining tables that have
columns that have only one match
per value in their linking column.
The results do get slightly more
complicated when you apply outer joints to
tables who relationships have cardinality
constraints that are greater than one.
Or if some of your tables
have duplicate rows.
I hope you will join me and your tables
in the next video to find out why.